VPC -  Virtual Private Cloud -- AWS 
EBS - Elastic Block Storage

3 Levels of storage -- Block, , File


Stack
    Application
    Data
    Runtime
    Middleware
    OS
    Virtualization
    Server
    Storage 
    Network 
    Physical

Mavern, gradle, ANT, NPM 



21-02-2026

    IP - identifier of a device
    IPV4, IPV6

    IPV4 - 32 bit -- xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx -4 octet / 32 bits / 4 bytes 

    IP -- Network Part (bits) + Host Part (bits)
    Class A, B, C, D, E 
    D, E - Defence and research 

    Class A -- Network bits (8) + host bits(24) 
                10.0.0.0/8 ===      1 - 126
                Default subnet mask : 255.0.0.0
                Strats with -- 0

    Class B -- Network bits (16) + host bits(16)
                128.3.0.0/16 ===    128 - 191
                Default subnet mask : 255.255.0.0
                Strats with -- 10

    Class C -- Network bits (24) + host bits (8)
                192.168.3.0/24 ===  192 - 223
                Default subnet mask : 255.255.255.0
                Strats with -- 110


    127 - loop back addess -- ping self



    11110000
    00101101



    192.168.3.0/24


    Steps in creating VPC:
        Step 1: Create VPC ie VPC-UST with CIDR 192.168.3.0/24
        Step 2: Create  UST-VPC-pubsubnet-A 
                        192.168.3.0/25
                        UST-VPC-prisubnet-B 
                        192.168.3.128/25
        Step 3: Create Route Table ie pub-RT-A
                Create Route Table ie pri-RT-B
        Step 4: subnet Association 
                    Go to Route Table pub-RT-A do subnet association UST-VPC-pubsubnet-A
                    Go to Route Table pri-RT-B do subnet association UST-VPC-purisubnet-B
        Step 5: 

    I am a fresher who recently completed my Bachelor's of engineering degree in Computer Science and Engineering. Now I stared as an intern at MNC in devops. I currently am learning aws cloud. I need to explain about what i learnt to my senior. I learnt about EC2 instance, VPC, Security group, elastic IP, Rout table, Subnet, IPV4, IP Class A, B, C, D, E, 3 tier architecture, deployment, nginx, and more on. Help me explain it to him in IT terminology. 



24/02/2026
    NAT gateway -- Deploy private instance and access internet with NAT gateway
    Rout table -- 
    NACL || Security group -- Traffic type
    High availability and Scalability
        SCALING -- Vertical Scaling && Horizontal Scaling
        Vertical :
            increasing size of instance t2.small to t2.large
        Horizontal:
            increasing or decreasing no of instance
        High availability -- links to horizontal Scaling 
            runnig the application in minimum 2 or more availability zones
            it is passive in nature in multiAZ
            Scale out or scale in 
        
    Artifacting Importance
        Dependancy issue -- Containerization
    Load balancer -- Forward traffic to multiple servers
        Uses:
            Spread across multiple downstream instances
            single point of access to the application 
            handle failure of downstram instances 
            health check to instances 
            ssl termination
            stickiness with cookies
            high availability across zones
            seperate public and private traffic 
    Types of load balancer 
        Application
            HTTP Traffic , HTTPS, Web Socket
        Network 
            TCP Protocol Secure TCP 
        Gateway
            IP Protocol -- Network Layer
    Load balancer -- Listener run routing
    Target group - Group of instances to which the traffic is sent 

LAN Graph
LAN Chain
LAN Queue
Fast API

168186

27/02/2026
    sudo apt install docker

Image Management

Build an image: docker build -t <image_name> .

List images: docker images

Remove an image: docker rmi <image_name>

Pull an image from Docker Hub: docker pull <image_name>

Push an image to Docker Hub: docker push <username>/<image_name>

Prune unused images: docker image prune

Container Management

Run a container: docker run <image_name>

Run a container with a custom name: docker run --name <container_name> <image_name>

Run a container in detached mode: docker run -d <image_name>

Map ports: docker run -p <host_port>:<container_port> <image_name>

Start a container: docker start <container_name>

Stop a container: docker stop <container_name>

Remove a container: docker rm <container_name>

List running containers: docker ps

List all containers (including stopped): docker ps -a

Inspecting and Debugging

Inspect a container: docker inspect <container_name>

View logs of a container: docker logs -f <container_name>

Check resource usage: docker container stats

View running processes in a container: docker container top <container_name>

Interacting with Containers

Execute a command in a running container: docker exec -it <container_name> <command>

Open a shell inside a container: docker exec -it <container_name> sh

System Cleanup

Remove unused containers, images, and networks: docker system prune

Remove all unused images: docker image prune -a

Docker Compose

Start services: docker-compose up

Stop services: docker-compose down

View running services: docker-compose ps


02-03-2026
    The moment a container is established in a host, a bridge network is established.
    default and custom bridge network 
        


03-03-2026
    Components of docker compose
    '-' indicates list of values in yaml files
        service:
            backend:
                image /
                build /
                port / 
                network
            frontend:
            mysql:


restart : always, none, on fail 



07-03-2026
    2 nodes --  control plane or worker plane 
    pods are deployed in worker nodes 

    cluster has 4 major components -- 
        scheduler
        cloud controller manager
        etcd
        controller manager

    all communication happens through API server 

    cri - container runtime interface 

    kube proxy is for networking services 






    Docker networking services  
        IPAM -- IP Address Management - 
            gives different IP Address to different containers. 
            it is a feature of docker 
        network drivers help communication
            bridge network
                it is default network
                called as docker 0 
                veth cable pairs
                it is isolated
            host - direct communication with host. 
                max performance
                minimal overhead
                no isolation
                no port mapping
            none network
                containernot connected to network
                security max 
            custom docker networks
                provide
                    network isolation 
                    automatic DNS
                    Security control
                    Flecibilitu
            docker compose 

            daemon.json
            var/run/docker/netns

            IP Tables - security table -- manage rules
            masqueride --> 
            IPAM -->
            in-memory database -->

        

    Container volumes
        container are temproary
        container storage is ephimeral

        3 types of volumes
            Anonymous volume 
                stored in host location
                random identity name 
                data is not deleted even if container is deleted  -- persistance
                it is the most simple time of volume -- simplicity
                it is managed by docker 
                it has no name. so reuse is difficuly
                syntax --
                    docker run -v /data:ro nginx ---> ro -> read only
                    docker run -d -v /app/data nginx 
                     -> volume name 99dh986fsgdy567yuh 
                     -> docker volume inspect 99dh986fsgdy567yuh
                     mount point -> /var/lib/docker/volume/99dh986fsgdy567yuh/_data
                flag definitions
                    :rw -> read write
                        -> default
                    :ro -> read only
                    :Z  -> private 
                    :z  -> public 
                    :nocopy
                mount flag
                    docker run --mount type=volume, target=/data nginx
                :rw, :ro, :Z, :z, :nocopy
            
            Named volumes
                docker volume create myVolume
                docker volume create --driver local myVolume
                docker volume create --label env=dev myVolume
                docker volume create --opt type=tmpfs myVolume

                docker run -v myVolume:/data nginx
                docker run -v myVolume:/data:ro nginx
                docker run -v myVolume:/data:z nginx
                docker run -v myVolume:/data:Z nginx

                docker run --mount type=volume,source=myVolume,target=/data nginx

                dangling/orphan volumes are not attached to any containers 

                docker volume inspect myVolume

            Bind mount 
                docker run --mount type=bind,source=/host/path,target=/app nginx
                docker run -v /host_path:container_path nginx 


            tmpfs
                temproary file storage
                present inside host system
                it is an in-memory filesystem
                docker run -it --tmpfs /tmp nginx bash 
                docker run --tmpfs /tmp:rw,size=100m,mode=1777 ubuntu 
                docker run --mount type=tmpfs,destination=/tmp nginx 
                docker run -it -tmpfs /temp:rw,nosuid,nodev,noexec,size=100m,uid=1000




        host location -- /var/lib/docker/volime/


09-03-2026

    Docker recap
        OCI is a set of standards for namespaces, cgroups, and other low-level components of containerization.
        OCI provides specifications for container runtime and image format, ensuring interoperability across different container platforms.
        Docker is a containerization platform that implements OCI standards

        Components of image -- 
            Base image -- OS layer
            Application layer -- application and dependencies 
            Runtime layer -- runtime environment for the application 
            Configuration layer -- environment variables, command to run, etc.
        
        common instructions in Dockerfile -- 
            FROM -- base image
            RUN -- execute command during build time
            CMD -- command to run when container starts
            EXPOSE -- port to expose
            ENV -- environment variables
            WORKDIR -- working directory inside container
            COPY -- copy files from host to container
            VOLUME -- mount volume inside container
        
        common snapshotters
            overlayfs
            zfs'devnoapper

        OCI Runtime specification -- 
            it is a specification for container runtime, defining how containers should be run and managed. 
            it provides a standard interface for container runtimes to interact with the underlying operating system. 
            it ensures that containers can run consistently across different platforms and environments.

        Namespace -- it is a feature of the Linux kernel that provides isolation for processes, network, and other resources. 
            it allows multiple containers to run on the same host without interfering with each other. 
            it provides a secure and isolated environment for each container.
            there are different types of namespaces -- 
                PID namespace -- process isolation
                Network namespace -- network isolation
                Mount namespace -- file system isolation
                UTS namespace -- hostname isolation
                IPC namespace -- inter-process communication isolation
                User namespace -- user and group ID isolation

            There are 7 types of namespaces in Linux:
                PID namespace -- process isolation
                Network namespace -- network isolation
                Mount namespace -- file system isolation
                UTS namespace -- hostname isolation
                IPC namespace -- inter-process communication isolation
                User namespace -- user and group ID isolation
                Cgroup namespace -- control group isolation

            UTS is a namespace the provides isolation by giving hostnames to containers.
            unshare -u -i -p --forn -n -m -U -C --map-root-user --map-root-group 

            cat /proc/cgroups -- control group information

        Union file system -- 
            it is a file system that allows multiple layers to be stacked on top of each other. 
            it is used in containerization to create images and containers. 
            it allows for efficient storage and sharing of files between containers.

            



    Kubernetes -- Container Orchestration tool 
    It is an open source platform for automating deployment, scaling, and management of containerized applications. 
    It was originally designed by Google and is now maintained by the Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF). 

    Kubernetes provides a framework to run distributed systems resiliently. It takes care of scaling and failover for your application, provides deployment patterns, and more.

    Kubernetes architecture -- 
        Master Node -- Control Plane
            API Server
            Scheduler
            Controller Manager
            etcd

        Worker Node -- Data Plane
            Kubelet
            Kube Proxy
            Container Runtime (Docker, containerd, CRI-O)

    API server 
        It recieves all API requests that recieves from users, CLI, and other components
        It validates authenticates and authorizes the request and then processes it.
        It is the central management entity that exposes the Kubernetes API.
        it acts as communication hub for all components in the cluster.
        it is responsible for maintaining the desired state of the cluster by processing API requests and updating the cluster state accordingly.
        all information is stored in etcd, and API server interacts with etcd to read and write cluster state information.

    Controller Manager 
        It is responsible for running controller processes that manage the state of the cluster. 
        It ensures that the desired state of the cluster matches the actual state by monitoring the cluster and making necessary adjustments. 
        It runs various controllers such as Node Controller, Replication Controller, Endpoints Controller, etc.

    Node Controller 
        It is responsible for monitoring the health of worker nodes and taking necessary actions if a node becomes unhealthy. 
        It ensures that the desired number of nodes are available in the cluster and manages node lifecycle events such as adding or removing nodes.
        It detects if node becomes unhealthy and takes necessary actions such as evicting pods from the node and marking it as unschedulable.
        It also manages node lifecycle events such as adding or removing nodes from the cluster.
        It marks nodes as not ready if they fail health checks and evict pods from unhealthy nodes to maintain cluster stability.
        It handles pod eviction from unhealthy nodes to maintain cluster stability and ensure that applications continue to run smoothly.

    Replicaset Controller 
        It is responsible for ensuring that a specified number of replicas of a pod are running at any given time. 
        It monitors the cluster and creates or deletes pods as necessary to maintain the desired number of replicas. 
        It ensures that the application is highly available and can handle failures by automatically replacing failed pods.
        It ensures that the desired number of pod replicas are running at all times by creating or deleting pods as necessary to maintain the specified remaddddplica count.
        It monitors the cluster and takes necessary actions to maintain the desired state of the application, ensuring

    Endpoint contoller manager
        It is responsible for managing the endpoints of services in the cluster. 
        It ensures that the endpoints are correctly configured and updated as necessary to allow communication between services and pods. 
        It monitors the cluster and takes necessary actions to maintain the desired state of service endpoints, ensuring that applications can communicate effectively within the cluster.
        Createoiny ye dame r 1points for services and updates them as necessary to ensure that services can communicate with the appropriate pods, maintaining the desired state of service endpoints in the cluster.

    Kube Scheduler 
        It is responsible for scheduling pods onto worker nodes based on resource availability and other constraints. 
        It monitors the cluster and makes scheduling decisions to ensure that pods are placed on appropriate nodes to optimize resource utilization and meet application requirements.
        It evaluates the resource requirements of pods and the available resources on worker nodes to make informed scheduling decisions, ensuring efficient utilization of cluster resources and optimal performance of applications.

    Scheduling phases
        1. Filtering -- it filters out nodes that do not meet the requirements of the pod, such as insufficient resources or incompatible hardware.
        2. Scoring -- it assigns scores to the remaining nodes based on various factors such as resource availability, affinity/anti-affinity rules, and other constraints.
        3. Binding -- it binds the pod to the selected node and updates the cluster state accordingly.

    Scheduler 
        It is the component that selects the most suitable worker node for a newly created pod to run on based on resource requirements and other constraints, ensuring efficient utilization of cluster resources and optimal performance of applications.
        It watches for new pods that have no assigned node and selects the most suitable worker node for them to run on based on resource requirements and other constraints, ensuring efficient utilization of cluster resources and optimal performance of applications.
        It identifies suitable worker nodes for newly created pods based on resource requirements and other constraints, ensuring efficient utilization of cluster resources and optimal performance of applications.
        It evaluates CPU and memory availability on worker nodes to make informed scheduling decisions, ensuring that pods are placed on nodes that can meet their resource needs and maintain optimal performance of applications.
        It also considers other factors such as affinity/anti-affinity rules, taints and tolerations, and other constraints to ensure that pods are scheduled on appropriate nodes that meet their requirements and maintain the desired state of the cluster.
        Filter and rank nodes on scheduling policy.
        Updates pod - node binding in API server.

    ETCD
        It is a distributed key-value store that is used to store the cluster state and configuration data of the kubernets cluster. 
        It stores complete cluster state, pod information, services and enpoints information, and cluster configuration data.
        It provides a reliable and consistent way to store and retrieve data across the cluster. 
        It allows kubernetes components to read and write cluster state information through the API server, ensuring that the desired state of the cluster is maintained and that applications can run smoothly.
        It is used by the API server to read and write cluster state information, ensuring that the desired state of the cluster is maintained.
        It is a distributed key-value store that provides a reliable and consistent way to store and retrieve data across the cluster, ensuring that the desired state of the cluster is maintained and that applications can run smoothly.
        It uses the Raft consensus algorithm to ensure data consistency and fault tolerance across the cluster, providing a reliable and resilient storage solution for Kubernetes cluster state and configuration data.
        It never communicates directly with worker nodes; instead, it interacts with the API server to read and write cluster state information, ensuring that the desired state of the cluster is maintained and that applications can run smoothly.
    
    Kubelet
        It is an agent that runs on each worker node and is responsible for managing the lifecycle of pods on that node. 
        It communicates with the API server to receive instructions and updates about the desired state of the cluster, and it ensures that the actual state of the pods on the node matches the desired state.
        It monitors the health of pods and takes necessary actions such as restarting failed containers or evicting unhealthy pods to maintain cluster stability and ensure that applications continue to run smoothly.
        It also manages the resources allocated to pods on the node, ensuring that they have access to the necessary CPU, memory, and other resources to run effectively.
        It is an agent that runs on each worker node and is responsible for managing the lifecycle of pods on that node, ensuring that the actual state of the pods matches the desired state as defined in the cluster configuration, and maintaining cluster stability by monitoring pod health and managing resources effectively.
        It ensures that containers defined in pod specifications are running properly
        It registers the worker node with the kubernetes cluster and reports the status of the node to the API server, ensuring that the cluster has accurate information about the available resources and can make informed scheduling decisions for pods.
        It also monitors the health of pods and takes necessary actions such as restarting failed containers or evicting unhealthy pods to maintain cluster stability and ensure that applications continue to run smoothly, ensuring that the desired state of the cluster is maintained and that applications can run effectively.
        It communicates with the API server to receive instructions and updates about the desired state of the cluster, ensuring that the actual state of the pods on the node matches the desired state as defined in the cluster configuration, and maintaining cluster stability by monitoring pod health and managing resources effectively.
        It watches for pods assigned to its node and ensures that the containers defined in the pod specifications are running properly, maintaining cluster stability by monitoring pod health and managing resources effectively to ensure that applications can run smoothly.
        It reads pod specifications from the API server and ensures that the containers defined in those specifications are running properly on the worker node, maintaining cluster stability by monitoring pod health and managing resources effectively to ensure that applications can run smoothly.
        It pulls container images using container runtime
        It starts containers inside pods
        It monitors the health of pods and takes necessary actions such as restarting failed containers or evicting unhealthy pods to maintain cluster stability and ensure that applications continue to run smoothly, ensuring that the desired state of the cluster is maintained and that applications can run effectively.
        It restarts the containers if they fail and evicts unhealthy pods to maintain cluster stability, ensuring that applications can run smoothly and that the desired state of the cluster is maintained.
        It reports node and pod status to the control plane, ensuring that the cluster has accurate information about the available resources and can make informed scheduling decisions for pods, while also maintaining cluster stability by monitoring pod health and managing resources effectively to ensure that applications can run smoothly.
    
    Kube Proxy
        It is a network proxy that runs on each worker node and is responsible for maintaining network rules
        It manages service networking and route traffic to appropriate pods
        It runs on every worker nodes and maintains network rules on the node to allow communication between pods and services, ensuring that applications can communicate effectively within the cluster.
        It uses IP tables or IPVS to manage network rules and route traffic to appropriate pods based on service definitions, ensuring that applications can communicate effectively within the cluster while maintaining network security and performance.
        It load balances traffic accross multiple pods
        It enables communication between pods and services within the cluster, ensuring that applications can communicate effectively while maintaining network security and performance, and providing a reliable and efficient networking solution for Kubernetes clusters.
        It updates network rules on worker nodes to allow communication between pods and services, ensuring that applications can communicate effectively within the cluster while maintaining network security and performance, and providing a reliable and efficient networking solution for Kubernetes clusters.

    Container runtime
        It is a software that is responsible for pulling container images and running containers on worker nodes.
        It pulls container images from container registries and runs containers on worker nodes, ensuring that applications can run effectively within the cluster.
        It creates container inside pods
        It starts and stops the containers
        It communicates with kubelet through CRI 
    
    Add-ons
        Metrics Server
        Core DNS
        CNI - Container Network Interface
    
    Core DNS
        It provides provides DNS resolution for services and pods within the cluster, allowing applications to discover and communicate with each other using DNS names instead of IP addresses, ensuring that applications can communicate effectively within the cluster while maintaining network security and performance.
        It converts service names to IP addresses, allowing applications to discover and communicate with each other using DNS names instead of IP addresses, ensuring that applications can communicate effectively within the cluster while maintaining network security and performance.
        It enables pod to service communication using DNS names, allowing applications to discover and communicate with each other using DNS names instead of IP addresses, ensuring that applications can communicate effectively within the cluster while maintaining network security and performance.
    
    Metric Server
        It collects CPU nad memory usage metrics from nodes and pods in the cluster, providing resource usage information that can be used for monitoring and scaling applications effectively within the cluster.
        It provides metrics to kubernetes APi
        It enables HPA (Horizontal Pod Autoscaling)

    CNI plugin
        It provides networking between pods and assign IP address to pods, ensuring that applications can communicate effectively within the cluster while maintaining network security and performance.
        It enables pod to pod communication and assigns IP addresses to pods, ensuring that applications can communicate effectively within the cluster while maintaining network security and performance, and providing a reliable and efficient networking solution for Kubernetes clusters.
        It enables cross node networking
        It creates virtual network interface between pods

    Kops
        in cloud 

    Node Network
    Pod Network
    Service Network

10-03-2026
    Pod specification will always be container

    Pod-- spec -
        Container
        metadata
            name
            labels


    replica set -- spec -
        replicas
        selector
        trmplate
        metadata
            name


11-03-2026
    if a cluster has 1 master node and many worker nodes, if the maste nodes fails, what will happens
    if we have 3 master nodes, to what master node does the worker node connect to
    place load balancer in front of the master node

    what happens internally when the pod creates
    pod life cycle
    replica set
    deployment

    set image imperative command

    kubectl rollout status deployment <deployment_name>
    kubectl rollout history deployment <deployment_name>

    create a deployment and check if it is running
    update using rolling update and check in url and status and history
    do a rollback and check if it is working
    do an update in replica set

12-03-2026
    event driven architecture

13-03-2026
    NAT
    switching
    routing

16-03-2026
    1. Which pod is taking more memory
    2. 

17-03-2026
    we create 2 volume and take one part od persistant volume.
    we claim the volume called as pvc - persistant volume claim
    in deployment, we mention the claims and mention in yaml files.
    thsi si done in 2 ways -- static, dynamic.
    the dynamic way is called storage class.

    replication contoler does not support set based.

    stateful appliacation store data and keep a tracking on it

    a stateful set is a kubernetes controller used to run stateful application as a pod in kubernetes cluster
    assign sticky identity - an origuinal identity to each pod
    a new pod is created by cloning previous pod data
    if the previous pod is in pending state, new pod will not be created
    if u delete the pod, it will be deleted in reverse order of creation
    volume is created in stateful application
    
    Empty dir
        share data betwween containers in a pod
        it is temproary storage
        it exists as long as the pod is running

    
    Persistant volume
        stores data in cloud
        data is not stored in node
        data is stored in a seperate storage

        pvc is under namespace scope
        data is stored in storage class

        template:
            PV -> capacity, accessMode, storageClassName, persistentVolumeReclaimPolicy, hostPath
            PVC -> accessMode, storageClassName, resources

        static pv storages
            hoostpath
            aws ebs
            nfs
            azure disk
            gce persistent disk
            azure file
            cephfs rook-ceph
            iscsi
            fiber channel
            local
        
        modes : read worte many
        read write once -- mounted and accessed by a single node -- use case - database and read replicas
        read only many -- mounted and accessed by many nodes
        read write many -- mounted and accessed by many nodes

        access mode defines how a volume can be mouned accross nodes.
        mismatch will prevent pvc binding and block pod scheduling

19-03-2026
    Stateful Set
        it manages the pod order of creation and deletion
        it is used for stateful applications that require stable network identity and persistent storage
        it provides stable network identity by assigning a unique hostname to each pod based on its ordinal index, ensuring that each pod can be reliably identified and accessed within the cluster, which is essential for stateful applications that require stable network identity.
        it provides persistent storage by allowing each pod to have its own persistent volume claim, ensuring that data is preserved even if a pod is rescheduled or recreated, which is crucial for stateful applications that require data persistence.

        mysql-0.mysql.default.svc.cluster.local -- default DNS name 


23-03-2026
    Implementation:
        Stateful set:
                1. pv.yaml -- static persistent volume
                2. statefulset yml  -- database
                3. create config maps, secrets
                4. create service for database 

            apply yaml files
                

24-03-2026
    Gateway class -- defines which controller will be used to implement the gateway
    Gateway -- configures listening ports
    HTTP route -- path based routing 
    Controller -- watches resources 

    Rquest Limit
        no req no lim
            memory exhaust
            OOM Killed
            CPU throtling
            cluster instability
        only req 
            scheduling adcantage
            runtime risk
        
25-03-2026
    scheduling controller
        hardware requirements
        compilance security
        performance optimization
        cost management

        node-role.kubernetes.io/worker 
        
    Taints 

27-03-2026
    AWS -- IAM
    AWS -- cognito -- user management

    1. create 2 keys for both users using openssl
    2. generate certificate

    Service account -- identity for a pod 

28-03-2026

    1. Pod created with service account 
    2. Kubelet request token from API server 
    3. API server creates JWT using the SA and pod info with expiration of 1 hour
    4. This will be signed by sa.key private key 
    5. kubelet mounts token into a pod 
    6. Pod calls API server using this token 
    7. API server verifies JWT signature and checks RBAC 

    /etc/kubernetes/pki

06-04-2026
    1. What is organization in github?
    2. keys
        workflow level keys
        